.TH QUILLAN2 1 "2026\-03\-13" "quillan2 1.1.0" "User Commands"
.\" ===================================================================
.SH NAME
quillan2 \- filesystem\-driven AI story generation engine
.\" ===================================================================
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B quillan2
[\fIGLOBAL OPTIONS\fR]
.I COMMAND
[\fICOMMAND OPTIONS\fR]
.\" ===================================================================
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B quillan2
turns a short idea file into a fully planned and drafted long\-form story.
It calls LLM providers (OpenAI, xAI, Google Gemini) via LiteLLM to produce
world\-building documents, a beat\-by\-beat outline, individual beat
specifications, and finally polished prose \(em all stored as human\-readable
YAML and Markdown files on disk.
.PP
Stories are organised in a four\-level hierarchy:
.RS 4
.B world
\(-> canon \(-> series \(-> story
.RE
.PP
All generated files live under a single
.I data directory
(default:
.IR ./quillan_data )
and are fully editable between pipeline stages.
.\" ===================================================================
.SH COMMANDS
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS create \fIIDEA_FILE\fR
Read
.I IDEA_FILE
and use an LLM to generate the full story planning structure.
No prose is written at this stage.
Generated files include:
.RS 4
.TP
.B Universe_Bible.md
World\-building rules and lore.
.TP
.B Canon_Rules.md / World_Axioms.md
Hard and soft rules governing the story world.
.TP
.B Canon_Packet.md
Compressed world context injected into every beat draft.
.TP
.B Creative_Brief.yaml
Voice, tone, themes, and motifs that govern the prose style.
.TP
.B Story_Spine.yaml
Act structure, turning points, and per\-beat tension curve.
.TP
.B Character_Arcs.yaml
Per\-character arc, motivation, and transformation notes.
.TP
.B Subplot_Register.yaml
Active subplots and their status at each beat.
.TP
.B Conflict_Map.yaml
Internal and external conflicts driving each act.
.TP
.B Outline.yaml
Chapter and beat outline (the story blueprint).
.TP
.B beat_spec.yaml
Per\-beat planning and narrative constraints (one per beat).
.TP
.B dependency_map.json
Which beats must be written before which others.
.RE
.PP
If the idea file is short or vague, a
.I Creative_Brief_Interview.md
is generated and the command pauses for you to fill in answers.
Re\-run after completing it, or pass
.B \-\-no\-interview
to skip the interview.
.PP
After
.BR create ,
review and optionally edit the generated YAML files, then run
.B draft
to write the actual prose.
.PP
.B Options:
.RS 4
.TP
.B \-\-no\-interview
Skip the creative brief interview even if the idea is vague.
.RE
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS draft \fISTORY\fR
Draft prose for the beats of an existing story structure.
.I STORY
must have been created with
.B create
first.
.PP
The pipeline runs in two phases:
.RS 4
.TP
.B Phase\ 1\ (parallel)
For each batch of independent beats: bundle context, write prose, audit quality.
Up to
.B QUILLAN_MAX_PARALLEL
beats are processed concurrently (default: 3).
.TP
.B Phase\ 2\ (serial)
Extract state changes from each draft, apply them, update continuity
(summary, threads, ledger) in a single batched LLM call.
.RE
.PP
Beats are scheduled in dependency order so each beat has access to the
accumulated story state of all preceding beats.
Already\-drafted beats are skipped unless
.B \-\-force
is given.
.PP
.B Options:
.RS 4
.TP
.B \-\-beats \fIMODE\fR
.I all
(default) to draft every beat, an integer to draft only that many,
or a comma\-separated list of beat IDs such as
.IR "C1\-S1\-B1,C2\-S1\-B3" .
.TP
.B \-\-force
Re\-draft beats that already have a
.IR Beat_Draft.md .
.TP
.B \-\-cascade
Also re\-draft every beat that transitively depends on the selected beats.
Implies
.BR \-\-force .
.TP
.B \-\-stale\-only
Re\-draft only beats whose spec file is newer than their draft.
Implies
.BR \-\-force .
Can be combined with
.BR \-\-cascade .
.TP
.B \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Print one progress line per beat as it is drafted.
.TP
.B \-\-stream
Write a live Markdown preview to
.I <story>.live.md
during drafting, updated after each beat completes.
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Print which beats would be drafted without making any LLM calls or writes.
.RE
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS quickdraft \fIIDEA_FILE\fR
Equivalent to running
.B create
immediately followed by
.BR draft .
Useful for rapid prototyping when you do not need to review the planning
files before writing prose.
.PP
.B Options:
.RS 4
.TP
.B \-\-beats \fIMODE\fR
.I all
(default) or an integer to limit the number of beats drafted.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-interview
Skip the creative brief interview even for vague ideas.
.TP
.B \-\-force
Re\-draft beats that already have a draft.
.TP
.B \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Print one progress line per beat.
.TP
.B \-\-stream
Write a live Markdown preview during drafting.
.RE
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS publish \fIIDEA_FILE\fR
The fully automated pipeline: idea file \(-> planning \(-> draft \(-> export.
Equivalent to running
.BR create ,
.BR draft ,
and
.B export
back to back with no intermediate review.
.PP
If the idea is short or vague, a
.I Creative_Brief_Interview.md
is generated and the command pauses. Fill in the answers and re\-run, or pass
.B \-\-no\-interview
to infer voice and themes directly.
.PP
.B Options:
.RS 4
.TP
.B \-\-format \fIFMT\fR
One of
.BR markdown ,
.BR epub " (default), "
.BR docx ,
.BR pdf ,
.BR mobi ,
or
.BR azw3 .
.TP
.B \-\-no\-interview
Skip the creative brief interview even for vague ideas.
.TP
.B \-\-cover / \-\-no\-cover
Generate an AI cover image (default: on). Requires
.BR OPENAI_API_KEY .
Disable with
.B \-\-no\-cover
to skip cover generation.
.TP
.B \-\-beats \fIMODE\fR
.I all
(default) or an integer to limit the number of beats drafted.
.TP
.B \-\-force
Re\-draft beats that already have a draft.
.TP
.B \-\-stream
Write a live Markdown preview during drafting.
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Print the plan without making API calls.
.TP
.B \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Print one progress line per beat.
.RE
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS estimate \fISTORY\fR
Print a token and cost estimate for drafting
.I STORY
without making any LLM calls.
Reads the dependency map and all beat specs to compute optimistic and
pessimistic USD cost ranges based on the current model pricing table.
.PP
.B Options:
.RS 4
.TP
.B \-\-beats \fIMODE\fR
Limit the estimate to a subset of beats (same syntax as
.BR draft ).
.TP
.B \-\-force
Estimate cost including already\-drafted beats (by default those are excluded).
.TP
.B \-\-json
Output the estimate as JSON instead of human\-readable text.
.RE
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS export \fISTORY\fR
Assemble beat drafts in outline order and export as a finished manuscript.
Output is written to the story's
.I export/
subdirectory.
.PP
.B Options:
.RS 4
.TP
.B \-\-format \fIFMT\fR
One of:
.RS 4
.TP
.B markdown
Plain Markdown (default, no extra tools needed).
.TP
.B epub
EPUB e\-book. Requires
.BR pandoc (1).
.TP
.B docx
Microsoft Word. Requires
.BR pandoc (1).
.TP
.B pdf
PDF. Requires
.BR pandoc (1)
and a LaTeX engine
.RB ( pdflatex (1)
or
.BR xelatex (1)).
.TP
.B mobi ", " azw3
Kindle formats. Requires
.BR pandoc (1)
and
.BR ebook-convert (1)
from Calibre.
.TP
.B audiobook
Narrated M4B audiobook (or ZIP of chapter MP3s if
.BR ffmpeg (1)
is unavailable).
Requires the
.B OPENAI_API_KEY
and uses the OpenAI TTS API.
Must be generated via a job first (see
.B serve
for web\-based generation).
.RE
.RE
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS cover \fISTORY\fR
Generate or assign a cover image for
.IR STORY .
.PP
.B Options:
.RS 4
.TP
.B \-\-image \fIPATH\fR
Use an existing image file instead of generating one via DALL\-E 3.
.TP
.B \-\-author \fINAME\fR
Author name for spine and cover text overlay.
.TP
.B \-\-regen
Regenerate even if a cover image already exists.
.RE
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS status \fISTORY\fR
Show planning and drafting progress for
.IR STORY .
Prints which planning artifacts exist, how many beats have specs and drafts,
what export files have been produced, and the estimated cost of the most
recent run (if telemetry is enabled).
No LLM calls or writes are made.
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS list
Print a table of all stories across the data directory.
Columns: world, canon, series, story name, total beats, drafted percentage,
and number of export files.
.PP
.B Options:
.RS 4
.TP
.B \-\-world \fINAME\fR
Filter output to a specific world.
.TP
.B \-\-canon \fINAME\fR
Filter to a specific canon.
.TP
.B \-\-series \fINAME\fR
Filter to a specific series.
.RE
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS regen\-specs \fISTORY\fR
Delete and regenerate beat specs using the current planning artifacts
(Creative Brief, Story Spine, Character Arcs).
Use after editing high\-level planning files to propagate changes into all
beat specs without losing prose drafts or continuity data.
.PP
.B Options:
.RS 4
.TP
.B \-\-beats \fIMODE\fR
.I all
(default), an integer N (first N beats), or a comma\-separated list of
beat IDs such as
.IR "C1\-S1\-B1,C1\-S1\-B3" .
.RE
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS delete \fISTORY\fR
Permanently delete
.I STORY
and all its files from the data directory.
Asks for confirmation unless
.B \-\-yes
is given.
.PP
.B Options:
.RS 4
.TP
.B \-\-yes
Skip the confirmation prompt.
.RE
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS tui \fISTORY\fR
Launch an interactive terminal workspace for
.IR STORY .
Browse beats, read and edit prose and beat specs, review all planning
artifacts, trigger LLM redrafts, and write in author mode — all from
the terminal.
.PP
Requires the
.B tui
optional dependency:
.RS 4
pip install quillan2[tui]
.RE
.PP
.B Keybindings:
.RS 4
.TP
.B j / k
Move to the next / previous beat in the list.
.TP
.B e
Toggle in\-app edit mode. On exit the draft is saved automatically.
Word count is shown in the title bar while editing.
.TP
.B h
Toggle author mode. Like edit mode, but
.B Ctrl\-S
also runs Phase 2 state extraction and continuity update in the background.
The context panel refreshes when the sync completes.
.TP
.B Ctrl\-S
Save the current draft (stays in edit / author mode).
In author mode, also triggers state sync.
.TP
.B E
Open the current beat draft in
.B $EDITOR
(external editor, fallback).
.TP
.B s
Open the current beat spec YAML in
.BR $EDITOR .
Context panel refreshes on return.
.TP
.B r
Force\-redraft the selected beat using the LLM in the background.
Shows progress in the title bar; reloads the draft on completion.
.TP
.B p
Open the planning review screen \(em a tabbed viewer/editor showing
Creative Brief, Outline, Story Spine, Character Arcs, Subplots, and Conflicts.
.B Ctrl\-S
saves the active tab.
.B q
or
.B Escape
returns to the main workspace.
.TP
.B l
Lock or unlock the selected beat.
A locked beat is skipped by
.BR "draft \-\-force" .
The TUI shows a padlock indicator next to locked beats.
.TP
.B a
Toggle the Story Spine arc view in the context panel.
Shows per\-beat tension levels with the current beat highlighted.
.TP
.B q
Quit the TUI.
.RE
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS serve
Start a FastAPI web server with a REST API and background job queue.
Supports user registration, JWT authentication, async story creation,
and a public story library with fork support.
.PP
Requires the
.B web
optional dependency:
.RS 4
pip install quillan2[web]
.RE
.PP
.B QUILLAN_JWT_SECRET
must be set to a random string before starting in any non\-development context.
Generate one with:
.RS 4
openssl rand \-hex 32
.RE
.PP
.B Options:
.RS 4
.TP
.B \-\-host \fIHOST\fR
Network interface to bind (default:
.BR 127.0.0.1 ).
Use
.B 0.0.0.0
to accept connections from other machines.
.TP
.B \-\-port \fIPORT\fR
TCP port (default:
.BR 8000 ).
.TP
.B \-\-dev
Allow starting with the default JWT secret (localhost development only).
Never use on a shared or internet\-facing server.
.RE
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS selftest
Run built\-in diagnostics with no API keys or network access required.
Verifies that core modules (paths, I/O, validation, token counting,
dependency graph, state patching, configuration) all work correctly.
Exits with status
.B 0
if all checks pass,
.B 1
if any fail. Run this after installation.
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS doctor
Check system readiness: Python version, required and optional packages,
external tools (pandoc, calibre, ffmpeg), API key connectivity, data
directory permissions, and available disk space.
Exits with status
.B 0
if all checks pass,
.B 1
if any required check fails.
Run after installation and when debugging connectivity problems.
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS runs
List recent draft runs with token counts and estimated cost.
Reads telemetry JSON files from
.IR quillan_data/.runs/ .
No LLM calls are made.
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS import\-story \fIFILE\fR
Ingest an existing manuscript
.RI ( .md
or
.IR .docx )
as a new story, splitting it into beats and creating stub planning
documents.
.PP
.B Options:
.RS 4
.TP
.B \-\-story \fINAME\fR
Story name (default: derived from filename).
.TP
.B \-\-target\-words \fIN\fR
Target words per beat when clustering paragraphs (default: 500).
.TP
.B \-\-plan
Also run the full planning pipeline to generate a Universe Bible,
Character Arcs, and other planning artifacts.
.RE
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS lock\-beat \fISTORY\fR \fIBEAT_ID\fR
Protect a beat from being overwritten by
.BR "draft \-\-force" .
Locked beats are shown with a padlock indicator in the TUI.
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS unlock\-beat \fISTORY\fR \fIBEAT_ID\fR
Remove the lock from a beat, allowing
.B draft \-\-force
to overwrite it.
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS versions \fISTORY\fR \fIBEAT_ID\fR
List saved draft versions for a beat, newest first.
Each version is identified by an ISO\-8601 UTC timestamp.
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS restore\-beat \fISTORY\fR \fIBEAT_ID\fR \fIVERSION\fR
Restore a beat draft to a previous saved version.
The current draft is snapshotted before the restore so the action is
itself undoable.
.PP
.B Options:
.RS 4
.TP
.B \-\-diff
Show a unified diff of the version versus the current draft before asking
for confirmation.
.TP
.B \-\-force
Skip the confirmation prompt.
.RE
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS restore\-state \fISTORY\fR [\fICHECKPOINT\fR]
Restore the story\(aqs continuity state from a checkpoint bundle.
.PP
.B Options:
.RS 4
.TP
.B \-\-list
List available checkpoints and exit.
.RE
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS show\-outline \fISTORY\fR
Print the outline for
.I STORY
as YAML to standard output.
No LLM calls are made.
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS edit\-outline \fISTORY\fR
Open the outline for
.I STORY
in
.BR $EDITOR .
Saves on exit.
Run
.B draft \-\-stale\-only
afterwards to re\-draft beats whose specs are now out of date.
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS add\-beat \fISTORY\fR
Insert a new beat into an existing chapter, rebuild the dependency map,
and regenerate the beat spec.
.PP
.B Options:
.RS 4
.TP
.B \-\-chapter \fIN\fR
Chapter number to append the beat to (required).
.TP
.B \-\-goal \fITEXT\fR
Narrative goal for the new beat (required).
.TP
.B \-\-title \fITEXT\fR
Optional short display title for the beat.
.RE
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS add\-sample \fISTORY\fR \fIFILE\fR
Register a prose sample file as a style reference for
.IR STORY .
.PP
.B Options:
.RS 4
.TP
.B \-\-extract\-profile
After registering the sample, run style fingerprint extraction and write
.IR style_profile.yaml .
.RE
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS character\-voice \fISTORY\fR \fICHARACTER\fR
Generate or update a dialogue voice profile for
.IR CHARACTER .
The profile is stored in
.I dialogue/<character>.yaml
and is automatically included in beat context bundles where the character appears.
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS revise \fISTORY\fR \fIBEAT_ID\fR
Ask the LLM to revise an existing beat draft, applying targeted notes.
The current draft is snapshotted first so the revision is undoable with
.BR restore\-beat .
.PP
.B Options:
.RS 4
.TP
.B \-\-notes \fITEXT\fR
Revision instructions for the LLM (required).
.RE
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS continuity\-check \fISTORY\fR
Scan drafted prose for continuity errors: character detail mismatches,
prop timeline violations, dropped subplot threads, and factual
inconsistencies with planning documents.
.PP
Results are written to
.IR continuity/drift_report.json .
.PP
.B Options:
.RS 4
.TP
.B \-\-llm
Also perform a deep LLM\-assisted check in addition to the fast pure\-Python scan.
.RE
.\" -------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS hooks \fISTORY\fR
List all plugin hooks installed for
.IR STORY ,
grouped by event name and discovery directory.
Supported events:
.BR pre_create ,
.BR post_create ,
.BR pre_draft ,
.BR post_draft ,
.BR pre_export ,
.BR post_export .
.\" ===================================================================
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
These options appear before the command name and apply to all commands.
.TP
.B \-\-world \fINAME\fR
World name \(em a shared universe that stories live inside.
Using the same world name reuses existing world\-building documents.
Default:
.BR default .
.TP
.B \-\-canon \fINAME\fR
Canon name \(em an alternate timeline or continuity within a world.
Default:
.B default
or
.BR QUILLAN_CANON .
.TP
.B \-\-series \fINAME\fR
Series name \(em a story arc grouping within a canon.
Default:
.B default
or
.BR QUILLAN_SERIES .
.TP
.B \-\-data\-dir \fIPATH\fR
Root directory where all story data is stored.
Default:
.B ./quillan_data
or
.BR QUILLAN_DATA_DIR .
.TP
.B \-\-config \fIPATH\fR
Path to a
.IR .env \-format
configuration file containing API keys and settings.
.\" ===================================================================
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.SS API Keys
.TP
.B OPENAI_API_KEY
API key for OpenAI (planning stage; also used for audiobook TTS).
.TP
.B XAI_API_KEY
API key for xAI / Grok (draft stage by default).
.TP
.B GEMINI_API_KEY
API key for Google Gemini (forensic/audit stage by default).
.SS Web Server
.TP
.B QUILLAN_JWT_SECRET
Secret key used to sign JWT tokens for the web API.
Required when running
.B serve
outside of
.B \-\-dev
mode. Generate with:
.IR "openssl rand \-hex 32" .
.SS Data & Storage
.TP
.B QUILLAN_DATA_DIR
Root data directory. Default:
.BR ./quillan_data .
.TP
.B QUILLAN_CANON
Default canon name. Default:
.BR default .
.TP
.B QUILLAN_SERIES
Default series name. Default:
.BR default .
.SS LLM Providers and Models
Each pipeline stage
.RB ( planning ", " draft ", " forensic )
has a provider and three model tiers (0\~=\~fast/cheap, 1\~=\~medium, 2\~=\~best).
Quillan2 starts with tier\~0 and escalates to higher tiers on validation failure.
.TP
.B QUILLAN_PLANNING_PROVIDER
Provider for the planning stage. Default:
.BR openai .
.TP
.B QUILLAN_DRAFT_PROVIDER
Provider for the draft stage. Default:
.BR xai .
.TP
.B QUILLAN_FORENSIC_PROVIDER
Provider for the forensic/audit stage. Default:
.BR gemini .
.TP
.B QUILLAN_PLANNING_MODEL_TIER0 / TIER1 / TIER2
Model names for planning stage tiers.
Defaults:
.BR gpt\-4o\-mini ,
.BR gpt\-4o ,
.BR gpt\-4o .
.TP
.B QUILLAN_DRAFT_MODEL_TIER0 / TIER1 / TIER2
Model names for draft stage tiers.
Defaults:
.BR grok\-2\-mini ,
.BR grok\-2 ,
.BR grok\-2 .
.TP
.B QUILLAN_FORENSIC_MODEL_TIER0 / TIER1 / TIER2
Model names for forensic stage tiers.
Defaults:
.BR gemini\-1.5\-flash ,
.BR gemini\-1.5\-pro ,
.BR gemini\-2.0\-pro .
.SS Local LLM Support
Set any of these to route a pipeline stage to a local OpenAI\-compatible
server (Ollama, vLLM, LM Studio, etc.).
When set, no remote API key is required for that stage.
.TP
.B QUILLAN_PLANNING_API_BASE
Base URL for the planning stage (e.g.\&
.IR http://localhost:11434/v1 ).
.TP
.B QUILLAN_DRAFT_API_BASE
Base URL for the draft stage.
.TP
.B QUILLAN_FORENSIC_API_BASE
Base URL for the forensic/audit stage.
.TP
.B QUILLAN_STRUCT_API_BASE
Base URL for the struct (structured extraction) stage.
.SS Text\-to\-Speech (Audiobook)
.TP
.B QUILLAN_TTS_MODEL
OpenAI TTS model to use. Default:
.BR tts\-1 .
.TP
.B QUILLAN_TTS_VOICE
Voice name for OpenAI TTS. Default:
.BR alloy .
Available voices:
.BR alloy ", " echo ", " fable ", " onyx ", " nova ", " shimmer .
.SS Execution
.TP
.B QUILLAN_MAX_PARALLEL
Maximum concurrent beat drafts (default:
.BR 3 ).
.TP
.B QUILLAN_RUN_MAX_COST_USD
Abort the run if the estimated API cost exceeds this value in USD
(default:
.BR 0 \ =\ no\ limit).
.TP
.B QUILLAN_RUN_MAX_CALLS
Abort the run after this many LLM calls (default:
.BR 0 \ =\ no\ limit).
.TP
.B QUILLAN_LLM_CALL_TIMEOUT
Seconds to wait for a single LLM call before treating it as a timeout
and escalating (default:
.BR 120 ;
.BR 0 \ =\ no\ timeout).
.TP
.B QUILLAN_MAX_PROMPT_TOKENS
Token budget per LLM call; context is trimmed if it exceeds this
(default:
.BR 32768 ).
.TP
.B QUILLAN_LLM_CACHE
Set to
.B false
to disable LLM response caching (default:
.BR true ).
Caching saves money on reruns; the cache is keyed by SHA\-256 of
(provider, model, system prompt, user prompt).
.TP
.B QUILLAN_DISTILL_CONTINUITY
Set to
.B 1
to enable LLM\-based continuity summary distillation (default: disabled).
.TP
.B QUILLAN_TELEMETRY
Set to
.B false
to disable per\-run telemetry JSON (default:
.BR true ).
.\" ===================================================================
.SH FILES
.TP
.I quillan_data/worlds/<world>/
World\-level planning documents shared across all stories in this world.
.TP
.I .../worlds/<world>/canons/<canon>/Character_Registry.yaml
Canon\-level character registry: accumulated character state from all
completed stories in this canon. Updated automatically after each draft.
.TP
.I .../canons/<canon>/series/<series>/stories/<story>/
Story root directory containing all generated artefacts.
.TP
.I .../stories/<story>/structure/
Planning artifacts: Outline.yaml, dependency_map.json, Creative_Brief.yaml,
Story_Spine.yaml, Character_Arcs.yaml, Subplot_Register.yaml, Conflict_Map.yaml.
.TP
.I .../stories/<story>/structure/Outline.yaml
Master beat ordering. Export and the TUI use this, not the filesystem order.
.TP
.I .../stories/<story>/structure/dependency_map.json
Beat dependency graph used for parallel scheduling.
.TP
.I .../stories/<story>/beats/<beat_id>/Beat_Draft.md
Prose output for a single beat. Human\-editable at any time.
.TP
.I .../stories/<story>/beats/<beat_id>/Beat_Draft.partial.md
Temporary file written during LLM streaming. Removed when the draft completes.
.TP
.I .../stories/<story>/continuity/current_state.yaml
Running story state: characters, world state, events. Updated after each beat.
.TP
.I .../stories/<story>/continuity/Summary.md
Rolling story summary maintained by the continuity aggregator.
.TP
.I .../stories/<story>/continuity/Threads.yaml
Open narrative threads. Updated after each beat.
.TP
.I .../stories/<story>/export/
Assembled manuscripts and audiobook files.
.TP
.I .../stories/<story>/beats/<beat_id>/versions/
Timestamped snapshots of the beat draft, created automatically before each overwrite.
.TP
.I quillan_data/.cache/
LLM response cache, keyed by SHA\-256 of (provider, model, system prompt, user prompt).
.TP
.I quillan_data/.runs/telemetry_*.json
Per\-run token counts, provider calls, and timing.
.TP
.I quillan_data/.web/quillan.db
SQLite database used by the web server (users, stories, jobs).
.\" ===================================================================
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Plan, review, then draft
.nf
echo "A botanist discovers that plants can think" > idea.txt
quillan2 \-\-world sf create idea.txt
# Review and edit quillan_data/worlds/sf/.../stories/idea/structure/Outline.yaml
quillan2 \-\-world sf draft idea
quillan2 \-\-world sf export idea \-\-format docx
.fi
.SS Rapid prototype
.nf
quillan2 \-\-world sf quickdraft idea.txt \-\-beats 5
quillan2 \-\-world sf export idea
.fi
.SS Incremental drafting with live preview
.nf
quillan2 \-\-world sf draft idea \-\-beats 10 \-\-stream \-\-verbose
# Read idea.live.md while it writes...
quillan2 \-\-world sf draft idea    # continue from beat 11
.fi
.SS Re\-draft after editing specs
.nf
# Edit a beat spec, then re\-draft that beat and everything that follows it
quillan2 \-\-world sf draft idea \-\-beats C2\-S1\-B1 \-\-cascade
.fi
.SS Audiobook export
.nf
quillan2 \-\-world sf export idea \-\-format audiobook
.fi
.SS Kindle export (requires Calibre)
.nf
quillan2 \-\-world sf export idea \-\-format mobi
.fi
.SS Interactive terminal workspace
.nf
quillan2 \-\-world sf tui idea
# Press p to review/edit planning artifacts
# Press r to redraft the selected beat
# Press h to enter author mode (Ctrl\-S syncs state)
.fi
.SS Verify installation and system readiness
.nf
quillan2 selftest
quillan2 \-\-config quillan.env doctor
.fi
.SS Import an existing manuscript
.nf
quillan2 \-\-config quillan.env import\-story draft.docx \-\-plan
.fi
.SS Lock a beat and view version history
.nf
quillan2 \-\-world sf lock\-beat idea C1\-S1\-B1
quillan2 \-\-world sf versions idea C1\-S1\-B1
quillan2 \-\-world sf restore\-beat idea C1\-S1\-B1 20260101T120000z \-\-diff
.fi
.SS Check run costs
.nf
quillan2 runs
.fi
.SS Using a config file
.nf
cat > ~/.quillan.env <<EOF
OPENAI_API_KEY=sk\-...
XAI_API_KEY=xai\-...
GEMINI_API_KEY=...
QUILLAN_MAX_PARALLEL=5
EOF
quillan2 \-\-config ~/.quillan.env \-\-world noir create my_idea.txt
.fi
.SS Web server
.nf
export QUILLAN_JWT_SECRET=$(openssl rand \-hex 32)
quillan2 serve \-\-host 0.0.0.0 \-\-port 8080
.fi
.\" ===================================================================
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pandoc (1),
.BR ebook-convert (1),
.BR ffmpeg (1),
.BR python3 (1)
.PP
Project home and issue tracker:
.I https://github.com/quillan/quillan2
.\" ===================================================================
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at the project issue tracker listed above.
.\" ===================================================================
.SH AUTHOR
The Quillan Project contributors.
